A Brief Introduction to the Bardos

by Patrul Rinpoche

Generally, whenever physically embodied beings die, they first experience the twenty phases
of coarse dissolution, which are as follows:

As the aggregate of form dissolves, the limbs twitch, and the body loses its strength and power.As
the mirror-like wisdom dissolves, the mind grows unclear and hazy.As the earth element
dissolves, the body grows dry.As the eye faculty dissolves, sight becomes unclear and
the eye takes on a rounder shape.As the object form dissolves, the body loses its vitality
and weakens.As the aggregate of sensations dissolves, the dying person can no longer detect
feelings.As the wisdom of equality dissolves, there is no longer any awareness of the three
types of sensation (i.e., pleasant, painful or neutral).As the water element dissolves,
the lips, sweat, urine, semen and ovum all dry up.As the ear faculty dissolves, external
and internal sounds can no longer be heard.As the object sound dissolves, the sounds of
the body itself can no longer be heard.As the aggregate of perception dissolves, it is no
longer possible to distinguish between different creatures.[1]As the wisdom of discernment
dissolves, the dying person forgets the names of his or her own parents, siblings or children.As
the fire element dissolves, proper digestion of food is no longer possible.As the
nose faculty dissolves, upper respiration[2] slows.As the object smell dissolves, the person
can no longer detect the odours of their own body.As the aggregate of formations dissolves,
the person is unable to carry out physical activities.As the all-accomplishing wisdom
dissolves, the person can no longer remember ordinary mundane tasks or their purpose.As the
wind element dissolves, the ten internal winds shift from their usual locations.As the
tongue faculty dissolves, the tongue feels thicker and shorter than usual and turns blue at
its base.As the object taste dissolves, the person can no longer detect the six kinds of
taste.

Following the twenty coarse forms of dissolution, which unfold in this way, comes the process
of subtle inner dissolution:

As earth dissolves into water, the person is unable to move the body and can no longer maintain
its strength.[3] It feels as if the body is sinking into the ground. As an inner sign,
there is a shimmering expanse of blue, and the impression of softly drizzling rain and flowing
water.

As water dissolves into fire, the mouth and nostrils dry up, and the tongue becomes lodged against
the palate. As an inner sign, there is an appearance of a smoky haze swirling on a
plain.

As fire dissolves into wind, the body loses heat in its extremities, and the stomach’s digestive
energy grows weaker. As an inner sign, shimmering red sparks crackle and flicker like
fireflies.

As wind dissolves into consciousness, exhalations become longer, and, as the coarse outer breathing
ceases, the person is unable to inhale. As an inner sign, there is a vision of a burning
lamp, and many torches arranged in a row.

As consciousness dissolves into space, as an inner sign, awareness is very clear, and as an
outer sign, there is an experience like the sky devoid of clouds.[4]

Then, as space dissolves into luminosity, four visions gradually unfold:

The white essence obtained from the father descends from the crown, and when it reaches the
heart there is what is called ‘appearance’. As an outer sign, this is accompanied by an experience
of whiteness, as when moonlight fills a completely clear sky that is entirely free
from clouds. As an inner sign, there is a clear experience of the self-clarity of consciousness
devoid of any coarse thought states focused on perceived objects.As the subtle red
element of the mother ascends from the base of the central channel, the wisdom of appearance
fades into ‘increase’. As an outer sign, a red vision unfolds like a cloudless sky pervaded
by sunlight. As an inner sign, there is an extremely clear state of mind devoid of any
coarse thought states focused on the perceiving subject.As the subtle white and red essences
meet at the heart, the wisdom of increase dissolves into ‘attainment’. Through this,
as an outer sign, there is an experience of blackness, like the thick darkness which falls
when the sky turns completely black. As an inner sign, extremely subtle thoughts involving
perceived objects and perceiving subject become completely absent, and all distinct concepts
based on the appearance aspect of mind fade away, so that, as the ordinary dualistic
mind ceases, the wisdom of attainment dawns.When the subtle essences of blood and breath,
the bindus A and HAṂ[5] and so on, which are inside the white, silken thread-like channel
in the heart, all dissolve completely, the ground luminosity of the moment of death arises.
As an outer sign, there is an experience of emptiness and clarity without centre or periphery,
like a cloudless sky when it is completely clear. As an inner sign, you remain in
co-emergent, non-conceptual wisdom that is entirely without elaboration. If, having recognized
this, you can settle into an ongoing experience of the present moment, mother and child
luminosities will meet together, and you will be liberated in the first bardo.

In this context, empty luminosity is explained according to the general approach of the tantras,
whereas how the forms of the deities arise out of clear light, how the tikles of light
and so on appear are explained in the Dzogchen tantras. Nevertheless, it would seem to be
rare for these to unfold in a way that provides an opportunity for liberation.[6]

Next, out of the luminosity into which the three visions dissolved, appearances unfold gradually
once again, and the body of the bardo of becoming is formed. For the first half of this
bardo, however long that might be, you have the form of your preceding life, and for the
second half you take on the appearance of your eventual rebirth. All sensory faculties are
intact, and you can travel anywhere but the mother’s womb, miraculously and without obstruction.
You are invisible to all except those of the same class (i.e. other bardo beings)
and those who have obtained divine vision. Since you have taken on something like a body
in a dream, for example, which is generated in an instant, and knows neither light nor complete
darkness, this is known as the ‘bardo of semi-darkness’.

It is difficult at this time to realize that you have died, so certain indications that you
are in the bardo have been taught. For instance, you do not see the sun or moon when looking
into the sky, and you leave no footprints and cast no shadow.

All manner of experiences, both positive and negative, arise at this stage, as a result of both
good and bad karma. In particular, there are the four so-called ‘fear-inducing sounds’,
which are:

the sound of a mountain collapsing, which comes from earth prāṇa,the sound of waves crashing
in the ocean, which comes from water prāṇa,the sound of fire ravaging a forest, which comes
from fire prāṇa, andthe sound of a thousand simultaneous claps of thunder, which comes
from wind prāṇa.[7]

The so-called ‘three terrifying abysses’ are the three white, red and black abysses which are
the spontaneous forms of the three poisons. When seeing them and falling into them, you
enter the womb.

This is also the stage at which you undertake a search for a birthplace, feel craving for a
home and a body, and so on. Various visions, which are indications of the entrance to a birthplace
can occur, with appearances such as wheels of light, caves, empty hollows, male and
female animals, male and female human beings and so on.

At these times, the crucial points of practice are as follows:

At first, when you are certain that you are going to die, you must cut all ties and attachment
to this life. Confess from the depths of your heart any downfalls and breakages of samaya,
harmful actions and so on. Devote not even so much as a single moment to feeling guilty
about your own negative actions, fearing death, or being attached to this life. Instead,
feel happiness and joy, and say to yourself: “Now I shall recognize the clear light at death.
Or, if that is not possible, since I shall certainly use the bardo as an opportunity
to travel to a pure realm such as Akaniṣṭha, Zangdokpalri or Sukhāvatī, I shall be joyful.”
Maintain, without ever letting it slip away, the strong intention and thought “I shall travel
to the pure realms!”

Gently, in a relaxed way, as you settle into an experience of whichever practice is the clearest
and most vivid for you, let go of the constituents of this life. Since you will be unable
to practise any unfamiliar pith instructions, rely only on those practices which are
clearest for you at the moment. These two points—settling into a practice in this way, and
aspiring to travel to a pure land such as Zangdokpalri—are unsurpassable. In particular,
it is absolutely crucial that you repeatedly form the intention to travel to the pure land
of your choosing. It is exceptionally important to understand that even now, both day and
night, you must never let go of this thought.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2010. With gratitude to Alak Zenkar Rinpoche, who kindly clarified
many points of the text.