Advice on Nonsectarianism

From Radiant Sunlight of the Victorious Ones' Teachings: A Brief, First-Hand Account of the
Liberating Life-Story of the Great Emanated Treasure Revealer, Along With Some Accounts of
Treasure Origins and Discussions of Various Topics

by Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa

Among the hundred major and thousand minor Treasure revealers (tertöns) of past and future who
are regents of the Lake-Born Mahāguru Padmasambhava, embodiment of all victors throughout
the three times, the one called Chokgyur Dechen Zhikpo Lingpa Trinlé Drodül Tsal thus addressed
all disciples living in this vast kingdom:

“From the beginning, naturally pure wakefulness is the basic space of everything. Within it,
all pure and impure phenomena are by nature non-arisen. At the same time, they are also self-arisen
through the potency of unobstructed display. Among all, everything that is good
and beneficial for the world—the appearing vessel together with its living contents, all
sentient beings—arises from the inseparable wisdom and great compassion that is the wisdom
activity of the perfect buddhas. And the main, foundational activity consists in the propagation
of the Dharma teachings. As Śāntideva said: May we meet with and serve the teachings—the
only cure for beings’ sufferingand the source of all happiness—and may they thus endure
forever! [1] "Accordingly, it is due to the kindness of Dharma kings, translators, and
scholars that the precious teachings of the victors, source of all benefit and happiness,
were able to spread and flourish in the world in general and in the snowy mountains of Tibet
in particular. Thus, the great preceptor Śāntarakṣita granted ordination to the ‘seven
men of trial,’[2] and propagated far and wide the teachings of the Vinaya, the root of the
doctrine. The Master Padmasambhava subjugated the gods and spirits of Tibet, binding them
with a powerful seal,[3] and he illuminated the essential teachings, the resultant tantras,
like the sun. He also prescribed various things that should be done in order to establish
auspicious connections for the long life of the king and the spread of the teachings
of the victors, such as turning a valley of sand into a grassy meadow. However, at that time,
there were evil ministers who delighted in the dark side. They drove a wedge of slander
between the master and the king, and as a result the king did not ask the master to establish
these auspicious connections. Thus, for instance, the necessary orders were not given
to the twelve tenma goddesses[4] to prevent the appearance of extremists in Tibet. The master
therefore prophesied that due to this failure to create the right auspicious conditions,
in the future, disputes would arise within the Buddhist teachings. This prophecy has
now come to pass. "Since the point of teaching and study is practice, it is not right to separate
scholastic from practical endeavors. And yet, today, those engaging in study and those
engaging in practice are set apart. Scholars call practitioners ‘ignorant meditators,’
saying that now is not the time for practice, and so on. They see them as bull-headed, these
great meditators whose focus is on practice, and they criticize them endlessly. Likewise,
practitioners heap scorn on scholars, describing as meaningless their earnest activities
of study and contemplation, teaching and listening. For them, this is but a parrot’s recitation
of the Dharma. "Nowadays, merely having a different preceptor and monastery is tantamount
to belonging to a different sect or lineage. People are partisan, biased towards
their own monasteries, their own localities. They favor the masters and preceptors of their
local community, while heaping lavish criticism on others and on the teachings—all in a
scramble for gain, honor, wealth, and fame. In the end, they take up weapons and kill each
other, and so it goes on. Even those who follow the same texts and the words of the same
masters go their separate ways, blown apart on the breeze. "Practitioners too have started
identifying different masters and monasteries as ‘different lineages.’ They jealously eye
each other’s dwellings, students, and renown. They run around everywhere, not content with
mountain hermitages or isolated places. These people who have neither shame nor religion
obtain the name of ‘realized renunciants,’ and those who know nothing are hailed with the
words, ‘knowing one, they are wise in all.’ Their conduct is dissolute, their behavior careless,
and they are lazy, idle, and indolent. They claim that the throes of their attachment
and aversion are ‘the nature of meditation,’ and that they are ‘siddhas who have destroyed
delusion,’ and so on. And yet, if I investigate closely, I do not find any view or school
of thought that is superior to any other, or even particularly different. "There are
but slight variations in the way young monks debate about red and white colors,[5] and māntrikas
place their vajra and bell. Great meditators also differ slightly in their understanding
and perception of their experiences, but their ultimate goal and destination remain
the same—the single final intent of the victorious ones, of all the sūtras and tantras, scriptures
and commentaries. "This however is not sufficient to address all the slight variations
in the mindset of individuals. Thus, the so-called 'Old School’ (Nyingma) and ‘New
School’ (Sarma) respectively designate the earlier and later propagation of the teachings,
and are otherwise no different in terms of view or practice. Nevertheless, we call them so
in order to identify their different teaching styles. Similarly, the Kadampas, Sakyapas,
four elder and eight later Kagyüpas,[6] the Jonang, Zhalu, Bodongpas, Gadenpas and so on
may all hold different lineages with different conventions, but their ultimate view and accomplishment
are the same. Therefore, since all doctrines are intermingled and no one teaching
stands apart, there is no point in talking about different monasteries and lines of transmission;
ultimately, all these distinctions are complete delusion. And yet the teachings
these days are troubled by malignant forces, and are all but torn to pieces by the same
jealousy, competitiveness, attachment, and aversion that plague worldly traditions. "The
prophetic guide to one of my Treasures, The Spontaneous Fulfillment of Wishes (Sampa Lhündrup),
says: Talking out of their own personal likes and dislikes,༔they disguise mountains
of concepts as ‘Uḍḍiyāna’s words.’༔Based on predictions made in fake prophecies,༔self-praising
in tone and disparaging of others, ༔the single Dharma community is divided into factions.
༔In these conditions, study and practice are split asunder. ༔Through this inexpiable
karma of forsaking the Dharma, ༔great harm comes to oneself, to others, to the teachings,
and to beings. ༔Therefore, do not follow after charlatans: this is my heart-advice. ༔"One
should practice accordingly."Also, the All-Weaving Sūtra,[7] says: Mañjuśrī, consider the
karmic obscurations of forsaking the sublime Dharma. Mañjuśrī, those who consider some of
the Tathāgatas’ teachings to be good, and some to be bad, are forsaking the Dharma. When they
say, ‘This is right’ and ‘This is not right,’ they are forsaking the sublime Dharma. I
myself have never taught different Dharmas for the sake of the Listeners’ Vehicle, the Solitary
Realizers’ Vehicle, or indeed the Great Vehicle. Yet such fools differentiate my teachings,
saying ‘This was taught to the listeners; this to the solitary realizers.’ Through
this perception of difference, they forsake the sublime Dharma in its entirety. When they
say, ‘This is something bodhisattvas must train in; this is not something bodhisattvas must
train in,” they forsake the sublime Dharma. To talk about whether a particular Dharma
teacher is eloquent or not is to forsake the Dharma. Saying that he has taught the Dharma
incorrectly is forsaking the Dharma."Thus, those who wish themselves well should regret and
confess any such karma already accrued of forsaking the Dharma. They should vow that, from
now on, they will guard against it and refrain from it, even at the cost of their lives.
Though provisionally, in accordance with the mental level of disciples, the view and practice
of the different vehicles might appear as different, ultimately they are one. As for
us tertöns, we do not have any particular ‘tertön religion,’ aside from remaining impartial
and unbiased towards localities, communities, disciples, sects, and teachings. The union
of Sūtra and Tantra taught by the buddhas is what constitutes the teaching of the tertöns.
"Hence, those who have entered the Victor’s teachings should be entering the gateway of
Dharma with the wish to be free from saṃsāra. Furthermore, they should not be thinking only
of their own peace and happiness, but should have the overwhelming resolve to awaken for
the benefit of others. Thereafter, it is of utmost importance that they strictly keep the
rules of the three types of vows. As the supreme scholar Venerable Vasubandhu said: With
disciplined study and contemplation,one aptly prepares for meditation.[8]

"This should be understood. As the world-famous Lord Gampopa said:

Beginners strive in listening, contemplation, and meditation,and having become stable, they
practice persistently. "In just this way, one of my students—a Vinaya-holder of these degenerate
times, Karma Sangyé Chöpel, or Péma Drimé Lodrö Zhenpen Chökyi Nangwa[9]—has visited
all the Dharma centers and remote mountain hermitages of the foremost scholars and practitioners.
He has toured their monks’ colleges to engage in study and reflection, and stayed
in their retreat centers to enhance his practice of the essential points of Sūtra and Tantra.
Since serving the Dharma with pure, virtuous altruism forms part of the seven accumulations
of merit from material causes,[10] all decent people—high, low, and middling—should
seek him out! Not only that, but in these times when people hold to mere appearances, the
only attachment of this master from Ewam Chögar is to the beneficial qualities of the steadfast
scholar. Therefore, wherever you hail from—whether lay person, novice or pre-novice,
or fully-ordained monastic—if you are interested in the Vinaya of the sublime Dharma, you
should know him to have the undeniable status of a khenpo! Indeed, as it is said in the
four sections of Vinaya scriptures: ‘Monks, how much must be done so that we may say that
the sublime Dharma endures? As long as monks exert themselves and fulfill their duties, it
is said to endure.'[11] "

In this, the Fire Rabbit year of the fifteenth year-cycle (1867–68), may these words spread
forth from Orgyen Samten Chöling at Rudam Snowy Ridge, the main sacred site of wisdom qualities,
and may they bring goodness!

| Translated by Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Oriane Sherap Lhamo and Laura Dainty, ed.
Libby Hogg), with many thanks to James Gentry for kindly providing suggestions and clarifications.