An Exhortation to Tibetans

by Khenmo Rigdzin Chödrön

You have conquered all the sufferings of saṃsāra, so difficult to bear,And offer swift protection
as the deity who embodies the buddhas’ activity,Goddess who is without the eight flaws
and gives vision to all beings:Throughout all my lives, I honour you at the crown of my
head!

If we do not relax our intense feelings of longingFor attractive objects of desire, outer and
inner,Happiness will never arise in our limited minds.Therefore, to have few desires is
my exhortation.

The inability to tolerate the wealth that others have,Which they have gained through merit and
effort,Will eventually be the cause of our own downfall.Therefore, to abandon envy is my
exhortation.

The wealth and splendour that we amass is meaningless,And even if we cling to it, unable to
offer it to others,It is never truly ours, only a cause of further suffering.Therefore, to
abandon miserliness is my exhortation.

While lacking basic human qualities such as a noble temperamentOr great learning and knowledge
of the five sciences,We might be puffed up by the thought of some minor virtue,But to abandon
such pride is my exhortation.

So that the excellent tradition of being polite and respectfulTo the parents who have cared
for us since we were tiny,And to other men and women senior in years does not decline,To respect
one’s elders is my exhortation.

Forsaking entirely inappropriate, negative behaviour,Such as being unreliable, undignified and
immodest,Acting with impropriety or spoiling one’s own body,To respect one’s spouse is
my exhortation.

Since you must offer the very greatest wealth, an education,To the sons and daughters born from
your own bodies,Do not neglect them like animals, but teach them properly:Thus, to raise
your children with love is my exhortation.

Without due care, we’ll confuse what must be adopted and avoided,And, in others’ eyes, appear
hostile, even crazed,Losing our stability and opening the way to errors:Thus, to abandon
carelessness is my exhortation.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey at the suggestion of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche, 2017.