Beautiful String of Jewels
A Heart Advice
from Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö to Khandro Tsering Chödrön

jé lama nam la chaktsal lo
Homage to the venerable lamas!

tsé mitak tönké trin dang dra
This life of ours is fleeting, the same as autumn clouds:
dü danta yöpa danta mé
Now we have it—but now it is gone.
lü di ni chu yi chubur shyin
This body’s like a bubble, floating on a stream,
uk gyuwa lung seb marmé tsung
Our very breathing like a candle in the wind.
drok zangpo lha bu drawa yang
Those best friends of ours, they seem like children of the gods,
shul du kyur né drok wangmé
But once we’ve left them behind, they can never be by our side again.
gyunor dzé ri tar pung yö kyang
We may have stacked up wealth and possessions the size of a mountain,
khab tsam shyik khyerwé wang nimé
But not even a single needle can we carry with us.
kho chidak shinjé shyé jawé
He, the one called Yama, Lord of Death,
wang ma ter chimé yul du tri
Does not let us go, but drags us off into the next life.
lü dzepé langtso trak la sal
This body, glowing with youth and beauty,
tsar duk gi metok dra na yang
May look like a lovely flower in bloom,
dü nam shyik mitak sé kyi khyer
But one day the frost of impermanence will destroy it.
dra chidak shinjé chewa tsik
Our opponent, Yama Lord of Death, bares his fangs
lé ngenpé shyakpé wangmé dam
As he binds us, helpless, with the noose of our negative karma.
gyob sö kyi nam sa gangwé dü
And when heaven and earth fill with cries of “Strike!” and “Kill!”,
kyab lama könchok sum lemé
Then there’s no refuge anywhere, except the lama, the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha.
dü danta rangwang yöpé dü
Now is the time when freedom is still ours,
lo dampé chö la chokpé na
So if we turn our mind towards the Dharma,
lé jepa dön dangden par gyur
Then whatever we do will become truly meaningful.
rang sem di ta gö dang drawé
This mind of ours is like a wild horse,
ngejung chak gi drabpa dang
So tame it with the whip of renunciation, and
tsé dir nang trulpé shyenpa tong
Give up clinging to the delusory perceptions of this life.
drowa kün pamar shejé né
See all beings as your father and mother, and
jam nyingjé changchub sem nyi gom
Then cultivate love, compassion, and the two bodhicittas,
tekchen gyi lojong jongwar dzö
And perfect the mind training of the Mahāyāna!
drinché den tsawé lama dé
Never forget the root lama—and his unrepayable kindness—
dü namyang ma jé nying ü gom
But meditate on him in the centre of your heart.
soltab dang wang lang tuk yi sé
Pray to him, receive empowerments, and merge your mind one with his wisdom mind.
sem döné kyemé chökü shi
Mind is primordially unborn, and so by nature dharmakāya;
dang rangshyin ösal gakpamé
Its radiant nature is clear light, unceasing;
tsal natsok sharwa trulpé ku
Its display is nirmāṇakāya, arising in manifestations of every kind.
dé ku sum yermé lhün gyi drub
These three kāyas are indivisible, spontaneously present.
rangrik pé neluk dé yi ngang
Rest in this natural state of rigpa self-awareness:
lö chö lema jé cham dal tong
Don’t let the ordinary mind contrive and spoil it, but release everything, spacious and even.
namtok gi jesu ma drang shyok
Don’t follow rising thoughts; leave them be.
gang nang kün rangdrol drowar gyi
Let whatever appears unfold and naturally liberate itself.
tüntsam sukha dön dejö dang
In the breaks between sessions, recite mantras and prayers, and
zangchö sok mönlam yangyang dab
Excellent aspirations like The Prayer of Good Action.

tsul deké dampé trengwa di
And so, this garland of words of advice
tsering gi damchö drönma la
For Tsering Chödrön, ‘Long Life, Light of the Supreme Dharma’—
sampa zangpö dampa gé
My good heart spoke meritoriously;
gewé changchub nyur tob shok
And may that merit bring us swiftly to enlightenment!

by Chökyi Lodrö

| Translated by Rigpa Translations, 2011

Source: ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "gdams pa rin chen phreng mdzes/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos
kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 8: 333–334