Encouragement to Make the Most of the Freedoms and Advantages

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!

At the feet of the glorious guru Mañjuvajra
I bow down: stimulate my voice of counsel.

Since it will be difficult to regain such a support,So hard to find, make the most of the freedoms
and advantages.

This life is as precarious as a bubble in water.Māra, Lord of Death, is like a shadow at eventide.


Having reflected on the unbearable sufferings of saṃsāra,Adopt and avoid certain causes and
effects—this is crucial.

Hold the guru and Three Jewels to be the essence of refuge.Recognize all beings as your parents
and cultivate compassion.

Exert yourself in the paths of gathering accumulations and purifying obscurations.Continually
strive to pray to the guru out of devotion.

Integrate everything into the path: body as deity, speech as mantra,And all movements of mind
as great primordial wisdom.And dedicate all virtue, tainted and untainted, towards all beings.Make
an effort to recite the Good Actions, king of aspirations.

Not knowing the crucial point of mind, we stray into error.In this regard, by probing to the
root of deluded mind,We come to determine how body, speech and mindAre without basis or origin,
and how our present awarenessIs self-cognizant, ceaseless, and one with basic space,
beyond joining or parting.In naturally arising wisdom, in which clarity, awareness and emptinessAre
indivisible from the three kāyas, beyond the domain of the conceptualAnd unspoilt
by dualistic thought, allow yourself naturally to settle.Whatever thoughts arise, there
will no option but for them to be freed.

If you can exert yourself without distraction in practising like this,You will be liberated
within this lifetime or during the bardo,And capture the stronghold of the primordial state.


This was spoken by the bewildered fool Chökyi LodröMerely to avoid declining the request of
one with faith.May the virtue of offering such a brief summaryCause minds to be liberated
and the twofold aim to be spontaneously fulfilled.

Maṅgalaṃ.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.