On the Importance of Avoiding Criticism of the Teacher[1]

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

As master and students, we have an extensive Dharma connection through empowerment. Therefore,
to develop wrong view or feel disdainful would constitute a grievous fault in this and
all future lives and would lead to an experience of severe effects. As the Tantra of the Empowerment
of Vajrapāṇi[2] says:

"Blessed One, what is the fully ripened effect for those who criticize the master?" The Bhagavan
replied, "Vajrapāṇi, this would terrify the whole world, including the gods. It is not
to be spoken of, and yet, Lord of Secrets, I shall say just a little. Brave one, listen
attentively. Those unbearable hells for the boundless crimes and so on, which I have already
explained—it is to such places that they will go. And they will remain there for infinite
aeons. Therefore, never, under any circumstances, show contempt for the teacher."

The Fifty Verses on Guru Devotion says:

Those utter fools who criticize the masterWill fall prey to epidemics, leprosy, or disease,To
harmful influences, plagues or poison. They will be killed by rulers,Fires, snake venom,
drowning,Sky-farers, thieves, negative forces,Or corrupting influences and led to the hells.
Never under any circumstances do anythingThat might disturb the minds of the masters.If
you should do so out of foolishnessYou will surely be destroyed in hell.[3] It has been
clearly explained thatIt is in such terrifying hells as Avīci,Which have already been described,That
those who criticize the master will remain.[4]

Buddhajñānapāda’s Oral Tradition of Mañjuśrī says:

If anyone shows contemptFor a future Vajradhara,Such a person disrespects me,And I will forever
forsake them.[5]

From Introduction to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life:

And those who develop feelings of hostilityTowards these benefactors, the buddhas’ heirs,Will
languish in the hells, the mighty Sage has said,For aeons equal to the moments of their
malice.[6]

Such faults are taught extensively in all the sūtras and tantras. It is only right, therefore,
that those who seek what is good should adopt and avoid actions accordingly.

If there is significance to this exertion in the means of extending life,Undertaken with altruistic
intention as pure as mountain snow,May the guru, Three Supreme Jewels, the victors
and their heirs,Grant, here and now, the flowers of virtue, excellence and auspiciousness!


May guru and disciples remain inseparable, with unimpaired samaya,Accompany one another until
reaching the essence of awakening,And may teacher and retinue become indivisible in wisdom
intentWithin the pure realm of Akaniṣṭha Ghanavyūha.

Kyema!Some, whose minds are wild and deceitful,Profess to having faith in the guru,While actually
ignoring his commands,Avoiding deeds that might cause delight,And doing much that is
displeasing.Cast aside all such insincere assertion.

It’s been said that serving the guruIs a way to fulfil one’s own goals.This is to be considered
and understoodIn relation to the lives of Tilopa and Nāropa.

The lord of Dharma Sakya PaṇḍitaAlso said in a prayer of aspiration:"Abandoning all that brings
displeasure,May I carry out your activity!"

Since it is said thatThe guru from whom one receives empowerment,Even if he resembles a mangy
dog, should be revered at the crown,I think we should heed whatever the guru might say.


Still, there are those who talk of the guruWhile cherishing their own deep-seated desires.Such
deceitful, hypocritical devotionIs pointless, a thing to be cast aside.

This was spoken by Chökyi Lodrö.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2022.