Signs that the Common Preliminary Practices Have Penetrated the Mind

by Nyala Pema Dündul

If you can devote your body unstintingly to the practice,That's a sign that you've taken to
heart the preciousness of the freedoms and advantages.

If you can view gold and dirt with equanimity, seeing them as equal,That's a sign that you've
realized the illusory nature of transient things.

If you can regard the phenomena of saṃsāra as your enemies,That's a sign that you are crossing
over the ocean of suffering.

If you can pay meticulous attention to your actions and their effects,adopting virtue and abandoning
non-virtue,That's a sign that you've found the swift path for ascending to liberation.


If you can purify the negativity, defilements and habitual tendencies of yourbody, speech and
mind,That's a sign that you're closing the door to rebirth in saṃsāra’s lower realms.

If you can keep the Three Jewels in your mind, so that they're never separatefrom it,That's
a sign that you've been hooked by the compassion of the supreme refuge.

If you know how to integrate emptiness and compassion in your mindstream,That's a sign that
you're bringing phenomena into the essence of awakening.

If you can meditate on how all beings have been your parents,That's a sign of the arising of
the sun and moon of the great vehicle.

If you can dispel the obscurations of the darkness of ignorance,That's a sign of the dawning
of clear light within immaculate space.

If you can continuously carry the two accumulations onto the path,That's a sign that the fruition
of kāyas and wisdoms is maturing.

If you can see all that appears and exists arising in total purity as theguru,That's a sign
of reaching the pinnacle of Dzogchen yoga.

If you can recognize the vajra-kāya of all-penetrating pure awareness,That's a sign of transference
into the timeless space of primordial purity.

If you can recognize the unity of the three kāyas in pure awareness,That is a sign that the
fruition, which is Samantabhadra, is ripening.

This brief summary of the signs showing that the common preliminary practices have penetrated
the mindWas written in response to repeated requests from the assembly of mystudents,By
the old beggar called Dündul.Through this merit may all beings be matured and liberated!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005. Revised 2021.

Version: 2.0-20211028