Spontaneous Advice Connected with a Prayer

by Kyabje Chatral Rinpoche

How marvellous!Primordial buddha, the essence,and unceasing sambhogakāya, the nature,are united,
as compassion’s own radiance:Three-kāya guru, please know me!

Embodiment of the nine yānas and four kāyas,prophesied Sangye Dorje,who perfectly accomplished
the vast expanse of wisdom through lineages most blessed,manifesting your great love from
pure space:watch over me, your most devoted child!

Bestow blessings and empowermentsof the wisdom, symbolic, and oral lineages right now,and make
me inseparable from you!Please, I am praying.

In your compassionate visionis my dharmakāya inheritance — empty awareness —devoid of the husk
of temporal meditative experiences,and beyond view, meditation, conduct or result.

This self-emergent original naturehas always been free of conceptual mind;the full extent of
unaltered, fresh realization.To have the confidence of recognizing and resolving this,is
to see with naked awareness – the great boon of self-liberation.

Right here and right now —
pray reveal this to me!

On the swift path of luminous Great Perfection,with the force of fervent devotion as the causerealization
and liberation are actualized in a single lifetime.This result, the bhūmis and
paths perfect in the ground,isn’t merely a future hope or prospect — how incredible!

Awakening previously accrued meritand imbibing the nectar that ripens and liberates,Ignorance,
negativity, emotionality, confusion and its imprintsAre purified into unborn dharmakāya,and,
with effortless compassion,the realms of suffering beings are emptiedfrom their very
depths — such an extraordinary giftcan only come to a spoiled child like methrough the kindness
of the guru, my true father.

Without hoping to know all while missing what’s most important,I'll remain throughout my lifeWithin
the understanding of the one thing that liberates all.Glorious guru, please save mefrom
a journey full of mistakes and pitfalls!

Aside from fervent prayer,relax in non-doing, letting go of even virtuous deeds,and now whatever
happensis in our hands — be certain.

Guru, you know that within our environment and among beings,upon us all, myself and others,the
arrows of negative forces rain downin these impossibly dark times,and having seen how they
strike,you embraced a yogic lifestyle of humble non-doing,roaming in lonesome places and
isolated retreats,sustained without companions, alone,and like a flowing stream, day and
night,thoughts and perceptions became unending wisdom,with meditation and post-meditation
equal and complete —so I may savour everything as a single taste —Beloved guru, please know
me!

Since the noise of dry talkcarries the danger of self-deceptionwhile living, dying and in the
bardo,please bless me to be ever mindful!

This prayer of calling out to the guru, the equivalent of spiritual advice, was requested by
the young yogi Jigme Lodé, with an offering of a gold and silver maṇḍala. So as not to render
meaningless his repeated urging at different times, the elder Buddha Vajra uttered this
from his abode, the retreat centre Turquoise Dragon Land, and his daughter Saraswati wrote
it down. Maṅgalam.

| Translated by Christina Monson with the assistance of the Venerable Sean Price, 2016.