Sweet Nectar of the Supreme Vehicle

A Synopsis of the Stages of the Mahāyāna Path

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Homage to the guru and protector Mañjughoṣa!

Merely to recall you within the sky of my mindServes to dispel the pitch-darkness of delusion.Precious
one, great treasury of knowledge, Vajratīkṣṇa,[1]I present the great bliss chakra
of my crown at your feet.

Even though the profound and vast Mahāyāna treatisesHave not entered the slender needle-eye
of my mind,Encouraged by a spiritual guide of the supreme vehicle,I shall here reveal some
sayings of past scholars and adepts.

Throughout beginningless time in this ocean of existence,As we fail to recognise the natural
state of our own buddha nature,The primordially free sphere of reality, we wander through
saṃsāric states,Enclosed within the confines of our karmic and emotional obscurations.

Now, as a result of positive deeds gathered in the past,We have found an excellent support in
the higher realms, a basis for liberation’s certain good,This precious human body with its
adornments of freedoms and advantages,Surpassing even the situation of the mighty gods
Brahma, Śiva and Indra.

Having found such a basis, if we were simply to squander itUntil the fourth and final stage
of birth, ageing, sickness and death,There could be no greater loss, no graver tragedy than
that.So we must apply ourselves swiftly to Dharma practice.

If we’re constantly deceived by the eight worldly concernsAnd by sensory delights, our lives
are like butter lampsIn which the fuel is running out and cannot be replaced,And there’s
no one who can save us or offer protection.

Develop a mind of determination to escape conditioning,And recognise that no matter how many
worldly richesWe might acquire, they’re transient, the stuff of illusion,Devoid of any true
essence or significance.

Anyone who has wealth will have suffering.The fault of attachment will naturally develop,On
top of which, pride and jealousy will arise.Destroy, therefore, this great entanglement, source
of a hundred ills,And remain content, with few desires and limited needs.

From the summit of existence all the way down to Avīci,Nowhere is there even the slightest speck
of true happiness.It’s vital to consider how we’re constantly assailedBy the three sufferings
and to feel disenchanted.

All that is born must naturally expire in the end,Accumulated wealth will be exhausted in time.What’s
elevated will eventually be brought low,And gatherings will, by their nature, disperse.


Reflect again and again on how everything, everything,Is quick to perish and cease, unlasting
and unstable,And how beings’ lives are more fragile than bubbles,And thus limit the scope
of your plans accordingly.

No matter where we are reborn among the six classes in saṃsāra,It will bring suffering, as if
it were a fiery pit or island of ogresses.Knowing this, we must exert ourselves in the means
of escapeFrom these six classes, on the path of liberation’s certain good.

All phenomena depend on causes and conditions.With confidence in the validity of this infallible
processWhereby apparent things arise unceasingly through dependent origination,We must
adopt and avoid certain actions in line with their results.

The truth of the origin, karma and the mental afflictions,Brings about the result, the truth
of suffering.Its cessation brings the realization of the exalted,To actualize which we must
strive to follow the path.

As a support for vows, take refuge in the Three Jewels,And develop stable confidence, trust
and faith.As the root of the Mahāyāna path, develop altruism,Noble intention and the precious
mind of bodhicitta.

Recognise all beings throughout the whole of spaceAs your own mother and father from the past.Recall
the great kindnesses that they all have shown,Cultivate the mind training of exchanging
oneself and others,And practise repaying the kindnesses of one’s parents throughout
the six realms.Uproot the stubborn vine of cherishing oneself.Quash the attitude of seeking
exclusively your own happiness,And dedicate body, speech and mind to virtue in pursuit
of others’ wellbeing.

Free from attachment, recognise illusoriness,And by uniting skilful means and wisdom,Strive
always to avoid unwholesome action,Accumulate virtue, and secure beings’ welfare.[2]

Through the six perfections, the mainstay of bodhisattva conduct,And the four means of attraction,
train beings comprehensively.With deep wisdom, transcend the limits of existence and
quiescence,And thoroughly tear through the web of the two forms of obscuration.

The profound wisdom that realizes the absence of self-identityDerives initially from theories
based on study and reflection.Thereafter it is experienced in meditation involving effort,And
finally it becomes definitive, direct and natural realisation.At which point, the eggshell
of ignorance is broken apartAnd the sunlight of wisdom realisation shines upon the
dark.

Then, as far as the Vajra Vehicle is concerned,Since it has many methods, is swift and without
difficulty,Those of superior intellect should focus primarily upon it.The paths of the
three outer tantras are a little slowerSo study and practise whichever of the three inner
tantras—Father, mother or non-dual—appeals to you the most.

Receive empowerment from a fully qualified vajra masterInto a profound maṇḍala, and from that
moment onRegard all that the teacher does with devotion,Considering him or her to be inseparable
from Vajradhara.Visualize and practise this as the very essence of the path.

Should the samaya deteriorate you’ll be forced to burn in infernal fires.But, by keeping the
commitments, even without practising meditation,You will be liberated within the course of
seven or sixteen lives.

Whether you’re practising the path of generation or completion,You must ascertain the view that
is the vital core of everything.For this, you should examine using profound intelligenceThe
essence of your own clearly and vividly apparent mind.This is not to been seen through
analysis, for it lacks discernible essence.Beyond conceptual notions lies utter peace,
the dharmadhātu.This is not some blank and empty void;It’s natural luminosity, ultimate and
unconditioned,Unchanging, beyond lack or surplus, addition or removal,Realised nakedly and
directly through our own awareness.

Focus on this method at regular periods based on the guru’s kindness.Without it, paths will
be as empty and as hollow as a plantain tree.They will lack a core and fail to cut the root
of conditioned existence.Understand, then, that to learn this mystery of the mindIs the
unique course and intention of the buddhas of the three times.

With this, as the path of generation based on the vase empowerment,Recognise the unity of appearance
and emptiness, like the moon’s reflection,And generate the visualization of the form
of natural great bliss.

On the path of the secret empowerment, speech and wind-energy are purified.Through exertion
in remaining motionless and in binding and control,Wayward wind-energies are brought within
the central channelAnd the precious jewel of kumbhaka made stable.

Through training the wind-energy in the yoga of subtle essences,As a preliminary related to
the knowledge-wisdom empowerment,Master the emergence and reversal at the four chakras, and,By
bringing the essence into the chakras through the main practice of using a consort,Loosen
the knots in the channels, increase the strength of subtle winds and essences,And develop
the vigour that comes from accomplishing immortality,Before ultimately attaining the
level of Vajrasattva.

Thereafter, at the conclusion of this pure illustrative wisdom,Cultivate the waves of the fourth
empowerment.Practise the three solitudes in particular, and settle without contrivance.Actualizing
the immaculate co-emergent wisdom of the genuine nature,The vajra expanse, which
is like the centre of the sky,Will cause all the delusion of the three realms to fade
away,Bringing the full awakening that is the wisdom-essence of dharmakāya,In which the three
kāyas are present beyond any possibility of separation,And the liberation of other beings
occurs permanently, all-pervasively and spontaneously.

At all these stages, for the removal of obstacles and for enhancementConsult the words of the
genuinely learned and accomplished.In particular, you should never be without devotion to
the guru.Merge mind and wisdom and receive empowerments again and again.To restore samaya
exert yourself in feast offering, fulfilment and recitation.This will bring enhancement
at every stage of generation and completion.

Always cultivate mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness,And guard the vows you’ve received
as you would your very eyes.

By allowing renunciation, bodhicitta and genuine viewTo support one another you’ll make progress
in the Dharma.As Dharma progresses along the path it will pacify delusion,And delusion
will dawn as wisdom itself.

All the pure systems of the Buddha’s teachingsWithin this land of snowy peaks have but one intention.So
develop pure perception towards every tradition.Cultivate genuine and sincere
compassion for all beings.Dedicate all forms of virtue and make noble aspirations,And always
strive to make the teachings and beings thrive.

In this degenerate age, when life is short and plagued by illness,The compassion of Guru PadmasambhavaAnd
the noble lady Tārā is especially swift,So pray to them and invoke their wisdom
for your own and others’ sake.Make prayers of aspiration repeatedly for the wellbeing
of Tibet.

By exerting yourself in the practice that combinesGeneration and completion, the Khecarī of
Nāropa,Whose direct vision was the fruit of blessings,And whose line of blessings is undiminished,The
pinnacle of profound and vast instructionsOf the Sakya, sovereigns of the teachings
as a whole,You’ll spontaneously accomplish twofold benefit.

Thus, the sublime omnipresent lord KangyurpaIssued a request through the flute of his speechFor
advice and an account of realizationBased on personal experience; alas, I lack such experienceAnd
my life has been squandered on donated wealth.Still, merely to avoid disobeying
an instruction,Chökyi Lodrö, the savage who is devoid of Dharma,Resorted to words of the
sublime ones which he himself has not applied,And wrote this on the third ‘joy’ of the third
month of the Water Dragon,Together with the aspiration that any virtue be dedicated to
all beingsAnd the wish that this might be of benefit to others. Virtue!

Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.