The String of Pearls Advice

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

At the guru's feet, I pay homage.

Impelled by good deeds committed in the past,You have gained the wishing jewel of freedoms and
advantages,And sat at the feet of a qualified guru.Child, I think you fortunate indeed.


Now, when you have the chance to savourThe nectar of Dharma, profound and vast,Do not succumb
to the power of indolence,But practise intensely the heart of the teachings.

The root of all Dharma depends uponTaming and purifying your own mind.If you sever the mind
at its root as wellYou'll realize the non-duality of perceiver and perceived.Without arising,
remaining and ceasing,There is natural great emptiness, clear light.This, and this alone,
is mind's natural state.Realize it, and there's no doubt you'll seizeThe stronghold of
the deathless.

This is the ultimate culmination of
All generation and perfection practices.

Visualize the guru and receive the four empowerments.Meditate on the generation phase and cut
attachment.

Meditating on the perfection stage with signsBrings the bliss of melting and co-emergent wisdom.Meditating
well on the perfection stage without signs,You will come to abide in great
luminosity,And all deluded perception will fade into basic space.You will gain mastery of
the kāyas and wisdomsAnd carry out unlimited activity for others' benefit.

Contemplate impermanence, renunciation, and the effects of actions,And generate faith and devotion.Cultivate
loving kindness, compassion and bodhicitta.

Regard all that you perceive as the guru.Visualize him in your heart and merge your mind with
his wisdom mind.

Recognizing the union of clarity and emptinessAs the three kāyas brings complete awakening.Since
Buddhahood is present within yourself,It is not to be found by searching elsewhere.

As I have offered you this garland of advice,
Take its meaning to heart.

May you capture the dharmakāya strongholdAt death and reach the level of mighty Vajradhara!


Yet if you should not attain stability,May the guru and glorious YoginīGuide you to the celestial
realm.

Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö wrote these verses of advice based on whatever came to mind and offered
them. Siddhirastu.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.