The Precious Treasury of Written Instruction Transmitted One-to-One

by Patrul Rinpoche

This is for my son Śrī to keep in mind.

Three things must not be forgotten:The gracious guru,The compassionate Buddha,And mindfulness
and vigilance.

Three things must be recalled:The preceptor who transmitted the precepts,The teachings that
reveal those precepts,And the commitments and vows to be upheld.

Three things must be present:The mind in the body,The body on its seat,And the mind in relaxation.


Three things are best forgotten:Hated enemies,The objects of desire,And dullifying sleep.

Three things are best kept under control:Your mouth when at gatherings,Your hands when alone,And
your mind at all times.

Three things must be kept secret:Your own virtues,The faults of others,And plans for the future.


Three things should not be flaunted:Momentary renunciation,Deceptive ploys,And cursory deeds
of virtue.

Three places are best avoided:
Hostile crowds,
Large gatherings,
And venues of games.

Three things are not to be divulged:Dharma to the apathetic,Histories to the unfamiliar,And
talk of the impossible.

Three things are uncalled for:Moodiness toward friends,Inconsistencies in reports,And duplicity
in dealings.

Three things should be avoided:Gestures of self-importance,Backbiting,And derision of anyone.


Three things should not be surrendered:Resources to the privileged,Trust to charlatans,And heart-secrets
to anyone.

Three things should not be examined closely:A beauty’s physique,A friend’s actions,And one’s
own qualities.

Three things should be in accord:Conversation with friends,Clothes with the climate,And mind
with the Dharma.

Three things should go unheeded:Praise from others,Fanciful talk,And ill-considered advice.


Three things are not to be yearned for:The riches of the wealthy,Privileges of the high-ranking,And
ornaments of the glamorous.

Three things should not be criticized:Local celebrities,Wares that others are peddling,And friends
who have been kind.

Three types of person should not be praised:One who is universally condemned,A self-regarding
fool,And a child who knows nothing.

Three types of person should neither be praised nor criticized:One’s own close relations,An
unfamiliar lama,And anyone else at all.

There are many such statements, but what they all boil down to is this: Always examine yourself.
Don’t forget this. It includes both the Dharma and mundane ethics. It is the instruction
in a single statement and is extremely profound.

This is the advice of the yogi Drimé Lodrö for his son Śrī,[1] who is as dear as his own heart,
so put it into practice. May virtue abound.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.