Transforming Suffering and Happiness into Enlightenment

by Dodrupchen Jigme Tenpe Nyima

Homage

I pay homage to Noble Avalokiteśvara, recalling his qualities:Forever joyful at the happiness
of others,And plunged into sorrow whenever they suffer,You have fully realized Great Compassion,
with all its qualities,And abide, without a care for your own happiness or suffering![1]

Statement of Intent

I am going to put down here a partial instructionon how to use both happiness and suffering
as the path to enlightenment. This is indispensable for leading a spiritual life, a most needed
tool of the Noble Ones, and quite the most priceless teaching in the world.

There are two parts:

1) how to use suffering as the path,
2) and how to use happiness as the path.

Each one is approached firstly through relative truth, and then through absolute truth.

1) How to Use Suffering as the Path to Enlightenment

i. Through Relative Truth

Whenever we are harmed by sentient beings or anything else, if we make a habit out of perceiving
only the suffering, then when even the smallest problem comes up, it will cause enormous
anguish in our mind.

This is because the nature of any perception or idea, be it happiness or sorrow, is to grow
stronger and stronger the more we become accustomed to it. So as the strength of this pattern
gradually builds up, before long we’ll find that just about everything we perceive becomes
a cause for actually attracting unhappiness towards us, and happiness will never get
a chance.

If we do not realize that it all depends on the way in which mind develops this habit, and instead
we put the blame on external objects and situations alone, the flames of suffering,
negative karma, aggression and so on will spread like wildfire, without end. This is what
is called: “all appearances arising as enemies.”

We should arrive at a very precise understanding that the whole reason why sentient beings in
this degenerate age are plagued by so much suffering is because they have such feeble powers
of discernment.

So not to be hurt by the obstacles created by enemies, illness or harmful influences, does not
mean to say that things like sickness can be driven away, and that they will never occur
again. Rather, it simply means that they will not be able to obstruct us from practising
on the path.

In order for this to happen, we need: first, to get rid of the attitude of being entirely unwilling
to face any suffering ourselves and, second, to cultivate the attitude of actually
being joyful when suffering arises.

Dropping the Attitude of Being Entirely Unwilling to Suffer

Think about all the depression, anxiety and irritation we put ourselves through by always seeing
suffering as unfavourable, something to be avoided at all costs. Now, think about two
things: how useless this is, and how much trouble it causes. Go on reflecting on this repeatedly,
until you are absolutely convinced.

Then say to yourself: “From now on, whatever I have to suffer, I will never become anxious or
irritated.” Go over this again and again in your mind, and summon all your courage and determination.

First, let’s look at how useless it is. If we can do something to solve a problem, then there
is no need to worry or be unhappy about it; if we can’t, then it doesn’t help to worry or
be unhappy about it either.

Then, the enormous trouble involved. As long as we don’t get anxious and irritated, then our
strength of mind will enable us to bear even the hardest of sufferings easily; they’ll feel
as flimsy and insubstantial as cotton wool. But while we are dominated by anxiety, even
the tiniest problem becomes extremely difficult to cope with, because we have the additional
burden of mental discomfort and unhappiness.

Imagine, for example, trying to get rid of desire and attachment for someone we find attractive
while continuing to dwell all the while on their attractive qualities. It would all be
in vain. In just the same way, if we concentrate only on the pain brought by suffering, we’ll
never be able to develop endurance or the ability to bear it.[2] So, as in the instructions
called ‘Sealing the Doors of the Senses’, don’t latch onto all kinds of mind-made concepts
about your suffering. Learn instead to leave the mind undisturbed in its own natural
state, bring the mind home, rest there, and let it find its own ground.

Cultivating the Attitude of Being Joyful when Suffering Arises

Seeing suffering as an ally to help us on the path, we must learn to develop a sense of joy
when it arises. Yet whenever suffering strikes, unless we have some kind of spiritual practice
to bring to it, one which matches the capacity of our mind, no matter how many times
we might say to ourselves: ‘Well, as long as I’ve got roughly the right method, I’ll be able
to use suffering and obtain such and such a benefit’, it’s highly unlikely that we’ll succeed.
We’ll be as far from our goal, the saying goes, as the earth is from the sky.

Therefore, use suffering as the basis for the following practices:

a. Using Suffering to Train in Renunciation

Sometimes, then, use your suffering in order to train your mind in renunciation.

Say to yourself: “As long as I wander, powerless and without any freedom, in samsara, this kind
of suffering is not something unjust or unwarranted. It’s simply the very nature of samsara.”
At times, develop a deep sense of revulsion by thinking; “If it’s already so hard
for me to bear even the little suffering and pain of the happy realms, then what about the
suffering of the lower realms? Samsara is indeed an ocean of suffering, fathomless and without
any end!” Then turn your mind towards liberation, and enlightenment.

b. Using Suffering to Train in Taking Refuge

Say to yourself: “Life after life, again and again we are continuously plagued by these kind
of fears, and the one and only protection that can never fail us is the precious guide, the
Buddha, the precious path, the Dharma, and the precious companions on the way, the Saṅgha:
the Three Jewels. So it is on them that I must rely, entirely. Whatever happens, I will
never renounce them.” Let this become a firm conviction, and train in the practice of taking
refuge.

c. Using Suffering to Overcome Arrogance

As I explained before, [as long as we are in samsara] we are never independent or truly free
or in control of our lives. On the contrary, we are always dependent on and at the mercy
of suffering. So we must eliminate ‘the enemy that destroys anything that is wholesome and
good’, which is arrogance and pride; and we must do away with the evil attitude of belittling
others and considering them as inferior.

d. Using Suffering to Purify Harmful Actions

Remind yourself and realize: “All this suffering which I’m going through, and suffering which
is greater still—all the boundless suffering that there is—come from nothing but harmful,
negative actions.”

Reflect, carefully and thoroughly, how:

karma is certain—cause and effect is infallible;karma multiplies enormously;[3]you will never
face the effects of something you have not done;whatever you have done will never go to
waste.

Then say to yourself: “So, if I really don’t want to suffer any more, then I must give up the
cause of suffering, which is negativity.”[4] With the help of ‘The Four Powers’, make an
effort to acknowledge and purify all the negative actions you have accumulated in the past,
and then firmly resolve to avoid doing them in the future.

e. Using Suffering to Find Joy in Positive Action

Say to yourself: “If I really want to find happiness, which is the opposite of suffering, then
I have got to make an effort to practise its cause, which is positive action.” Think about
this in detail, and from every angle, and dwell on the implications. Then in every way
possible, do whatever you can to make your positive, beneficial actions increase.

f. Using Suffering to Train in Compassion

Say to yourself: “Just like me, others too are tormented by similar suffering, or even much
worse...” Train yourself by thinking: “If only they could be free from all this suffering!
How wonderful it would be!” This will also help you to understand how to practise loving
kindness, where the focus of the practice is those who have no happiness.

g. Using Suffering to Cherish Others More Than Yourself

Train yourself to think: “The very reason why I am not free from suffering such as this is that
from time immemorial I have cared only about myself. Now, from this moment onwards, I
will only cherish others, as this is the source of all happiness and good.”

It is extremely difficult to use suffering as the path when it has already struck, and is staring
us in the face. That is why it is crucial to become familiar in advance with the specific
practices to be used when misfortune and difficulties befall us. It is also particularly
helpful, and will really count, if we use the practice we know best, and of which we
have a clear, personal experience.

With this, suffering and difficulties can become a help for our spiritual practice—but that
alone is not enough. We need to gain a sense of real joy and enthusiasm, inspired by a thorough
appreciation for our achievement, and then to reinforce this, and make it stable and
continuous.

So, with each of the practices outlined above, say to yourself: “This suffering has been of
tremendous assistance; it will help me to achieve the many wonderful kinds of happiness and
bliss which are experienced in the higher realms and in liberation from samsara and which
are extremely difficult to find. From now on too, I know that whatever suffering lies in
store for me will have the same effect. So however tough, however difficult the suffering
may be, it will always bring me the greatest joy and happiness, bitter and yet sweet, like
those Indian cakes made of sugar mixed with cardamom and pepper.” Follow this line of thought
over and over, and very thoroughly, and get used to the happy state of mind that it
brings. By reflecting like this, our minds will be so suffused with happiness that the suffering
we feel through the senses will become almost imperceptible and incapable of disturbing
our minds. This is the point at which sickness can be overcome through forbearance. It’s
worth noting that this is also an indication as to whether difficulties brought about
by enemies, harmful spirits and so on can be overcome.

As we have already seen, reversing the attitude of not wanting to suffer is the whole basis
for transforming suffering into our spiritual path. This is because we simply won’t be able
to turn suffering into the path as long as anxiety and irritation continue to eat away at
our confidence and disturb our mind.

The more we arrive at actually transforming suffering into the path, the more we will enhance
and reinforce all our previous practice. This is because our courage and good humour will
grow all the more, once we can see from our own experience how suffering causes our spiritual
practice and qualities to blossom.

It is said that by training gradually with smaller sufferings, ‘step by step, in easy stages’,
then in the end we’ll be able to handle big suffering and difficulties too. We must go
about it like this, because it is extremely difficult to have an experience of something which
is beyond our level or capacity.

In the breaks between sessions, pray to the Lama and the Three Jewels that you may be able to
take suffering onto your path. When your mind has grown a little bit stronger, then make
offerings to the Three Jewels and to negative forces and insist: “Please send me misfortune
and obstacles, so I can work on developing the strength of my practice!” At the same time,
always, always stay confident, cheerful and happy.

When you first begin this training, it is vital to distance yourself from ordinary social activities.
Otherwise, caught up in everyday preoccupations and busyness, you will be influenced
by all your misguided friends, asking questions like: “How can you bear to put up with
so much suffering...so much humiliation...?”

Besides, the endless worrying about enemies, relatives and possessions will cloud our awareness,
and upset our minds beyond all our control, so that we inevitably go astray, sliding
into bad habits. Then, on top of this, we’ll be swept away by all kinds of distracting objects
and situations.

But in the solitude of a retreat environment, since none of these are present, your awareness
is very lucid and clear, and so it’s easy to make the mind do whatever you want it to do.

It is for this very reason that when practitioners of Chöd train in ‘trampling right on top
of suffering’, at the beginning they put off doing the practice using the harm caused by human
beings and amidst distraction, but instead make a point of working with the apparitions
of gods and demons in cemeteries and other desolate and powerful places.[5]

To sum up: Not only so that your mind will not be affected by misfortune and suffering, but
also to be able to draw happiness and peace of mind out of these things themselves, what we
need to do is this: Do not see inner problems like illness, or outer troubles like rivals,
spirits or scandalous gossip, as something undesirable and unpleasant, but instead simply
get used to seeing them as something pleasing and delightful.

To accomplish this, we need to stop looking at harmful circumstances as problems and make every
effort to view them as beneficial. After all, whether a thing is pleasant or unpleasant
comes down to how it is perceived by the mind.

Take an example: someone who continually dwells on the futility of ordinary, mundane preoccupations
will only get more and more fed up as their wealth or circle increase. On the other
hand, someone who sees worldly affairs as meaningful and beneficial will seek, and even
pray, to increase their power and influence.

With this kind of training then:

our mind and character will become more peaceful and more gentle;we will become more open (and
more flexible);we will be easier to get along with;we will be courageous and confident;we
will be freed from obstacles that hinder our Dharma practice;we will be able to turn any
negative circumstances to our advantage, meet with success, and bring glory and auspiciousness;and
our mind will always be content, in the happiness born of inner peace.

To follow a spiritual path in this degenerate age, we cannot be without armour of this kind.
Because if we’re no longer tormented by the suffering of anxiety and irritation, not only
will other kinds of suffering fade away, like soldiers who’ve lost their weapons, but even
misfortunes like illness will, as a rule, vanish on their own.

The saints of the past used to say:

“If you are not unhappy or discontented about anything, then your mind will not be disturbed.
Since your mind is not disturbed, the subtle wind energy (Tib. lung) will not be disturbed.
That means the other elements of the body will not be disturbed either. As a result, your
mind will not be disturbed, and so it goes on, as the wheel of constant happiness turns.”

Also:

Horses and donkeys with sores on their backsAre an easy prey for scavenging birds.People who
are prone to fear,Are easy victims to negative spirits.But not those whose character is stable
and strong.

Thus it is that the wise, seeing that all happiness and suffering depend upon the mind, will
seek their happiness and well-being within the mind. Since all the causes of happiness are
entirely within themselves, they will not be dependent on anything external, which means
that nothing whatsoever, be it sentient beings or anything else, can do them any harm. And
even when they die, this attitude will follow, so that they will always, always be free
and in control.

This is just how the bodhisattvas attain their meditative stabilization (samādhi) called ‘overwhelming
over all phenomena with bliss’.

However, foolish people chase after external objects and circumstances in the hope of finding
happiness. But whatever happiness they do find, great or small, it always turns out like
the saying:

You’re not in control; it’s all in others’ hands.As if your hair were caught up in a tree.

What you’d hoped for never comes to be; things never come together; or else you make misjudgments,
and there is only one failure after another. Enemies and thieves have no trouble harming
you, and even the slightest false accusation will separate you from your happiness.
However much a crow looks after a baby cuckoo, it can never turn it into a baby crow. In the
same way, if all your efforts are misguided and based on something unreliable, they will
bring nothing but fatigue for the gods, negative emotions for the spirits, and suffering
for yourself.

This ‘heart advice’ brings a hundred different essential instructions together, into one crucial
point. There are many other pith instructions on accepting suffering and hardships in
order to practise the path, and on transforming illness and destructive forces into the path,
as taught for example in the ‘Pacifying’ tradition. But here, in a way that’s easy to
understand, I have given a general outline of how to accept suffering, based on the writings
of the Noble Śāntideva, and his wise and learned followers.

ii. Through Absolute Truth

By means of reasoning, such as ‘the refutation of production from the four extremes’,[6] the
mind is drawn towards emptiness, the natural condition of things, a supreme state of peace,
and there it rests. In this state, let alone harmful circumstances or suffering, not even
their names can be found.

Even when you come out of this state, it’s not like before, when suffering arose in your mind
and you would react with dread and lack of confidence. Now you can overcome it by viewing
it as unreal and nothing but a label.

I have not gone into detail here.

2. How To Use Happiness as the Path to Enlightenment

i. Through Relative Truth

Whenever happiness and the various things that cause happiness appear, if we slip under their
power, then we will grow increasingly conceited, smug and lazy, which will block our spiritual
path and progress.

In fact it’s difficult not to be carried away by happiness, as Padampa Sangye pointed out:

We human beings can cope with a lot of suffering,
But very little happiness.

That’s why we need to open our eyes, in whatever ways we can, to the fact that happiness and
the things that cause happiness are all actually impermanent, and are by nature suffering.[7]

So try as best you can to arouse a deep sense of disillusionment, and to stop your mind indulging
in its usual apathy and negligence. Say to yourself:

“Look: all the happiness and material wealth of this world is trifling and insignificant, and
brings with it all kinds of problems and difficulties. Still, in a certain sense, it does
have its good side. Buddha said that someone whose freedom is impaired by suffering will
have great difficulty attaining enlightenment, but for someone who is happy, it is easier
to attain.

“What good fortune then to be able to practise the Dharma in a state of happiness like this!
So, from now on, in whatever way I can, I must convert this happiness into Dharma, and then
from the Dharma, happiness and well-being will continuously arise. That’s how I can train
in making Dharma and happiness support one another. Otherwise, I’ll always end up where
I started—like trying to boil water in a wooden saucepan.”

The main point to get here is that whatever happiness, whatever well-being, comes our way, we
must unite it with Dharma practice. This is the whole vision behind Nāgārjuna’s Garland
of Jewels.[8]

Even though we may be happy, if we don’t recognize it, we will never be able to make use of
that happiness as an opportunity for practising the Dharma. Instead we’ll be forever hoping
that some extra happiness will come our way, and we’ll waste our lives on countless projects
and actions. The antidote to this is to apply the practice wherever it is appropriate,
and, above all, to savour the nectar of contentment.

There are other ways of turning happiness into the path, especially those based on recalling
the kindness of the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha, and on the instructions for training in bodhicitta,
but this will do for now. As with using suffering as the path, so with happiness
too, you need to go to a solitary retreat environment and combine this with practices of
purification and accumulating merit and wisdom.

ii. The Absolute Dimension

This is the same as for turning suffering into the path.

What this Training Brings

If we cannot practise when we’re suffering because of all the anxiety we go through, and we
cannot practise when we’re happy because of our attachment to happiness, then that rules out
any chance of our practising Dharma at all. That is why there is nothing more crucial for
a practitioner than this training in turning happiness and suffering into the path.

And if you do have this training, no matter where you live, in a solitary place or in the middle
of a city; whatever the people around you are like, good or bad; whether you’re rich
or poor, happy or distressed; whatever you have to listen to, praise or condemnation, good
words or bad; you’ll never feel the slightest fear that it could bring you down in any way.
No wonder this training is called the ‘Lion-Like Yoga’.

Whatever you do, your mind will be happy, peaceful, spacious and relaxed. Your whole attitude
will be pure, and everything will turn out excellently. Your body might be living in this
impure world of ours, but your mind will experience the splendour of an unimaginable bliss,
like the bodhisattvas in their pure realms.

It’ll be just as the precious Kadampa masters used to say:

Keep happiness under control;Put an end to suffering.With happiness under controlAnd suffering
brought to an end:When you’re all alone,This training will be your true friend;When you
are sick,It will be your nurse.

Goldsmiths first remove the impurities from gold by melting it in fire, and then make it malleable
by rinsing it over and over again in water. It is just the same with the mind. If by
using happiness as the path, you become weary and disgusted with it, and by taking suffering
as the path, you make your mind clear and cheerful, then you will easily attain the extraordinary
samādhi which makes mind and body capable of doing anything you wish.

This instruction, I feel, is the most profound of all, for it perfects discipline, the source
of everything positive and wholesome. This is because not being attached to happiness creates
the basis of the extraordinary discipline of renunciation, and not being afraid of suffering
makes this discipline completely pure.

As they say:

Generosity forms the basis for discipline;
And patience is what purifies it.

By training in this practice now, then when you attain the higher stages of the path, this is
what it will be like:

You will realize that all phenomena are like an illusion, andTo be born again is just like walking
into a lovely garden.Whether you face prosperity or ruin,You’ll have no fear of negative
emotions or suffering.[9]

Here are some illustrations from the life of the Buddha. Before he attained enlightenment, he
abandoned the kingdom of a universal monarch as if it were straw and lived by the river
Nairañjanā without a care for the harshness of the austerities he was practising. What he
showed was that in order to accomplish our own ultimate benefit, the nectar of realization,
we must have mastered the one taste of happiness and suffering.

Then after he attained enlightenment, the chiefs of humans and gods, as far as the highest realms,
showed him the greatest reverence, placing his feet on the crown of their heads, and
offering to serve and honour him with all manner of delights. However, a brahmin called
Bhāradvāja abused him and criticized him a hundred times; he was accused of sexual misconduct
with the impudent daughter of another brahmin; he lived off rotten horse fodder for three
months in the land of King Agnidatta, and so on. But he remained without the slightest
fluctuation in his mind, neither elated nor downcast, like Mount Meru unshaken by the wind.
He showed that in order to accomplish the benefit of sentient beings, again we have to
have mastered that equal taste of happiness and suffering.

Afterword

A teaching like this should really be taught by the Kadampa masters, whose very lives enacted
their saying:

“No complaints when there’s suffering,
Great renunciation when there’s happiness.”

But if it’s someone like me who explains it, then I’m sure that even my own tongue is going
to get fed up and cringe with embarrassment. Still, with the sole aim of making one taste
of all the worldly preoccupations[10] my second nature, I, the old beggar Tenpe Nyima, have
written this, here in the forest of many birds.

| This edition was prepared especially for Lotsawa House by Adam Pearcey, 2006, based on earlier
versions by Rigpa Translations.