Words of Advice

from Kyabje Chatral Rinpoche

Namo gurubhyaḥ!

Precious master of unrepayable kindness, Pema Ledrel Tsal,[1]Remain as the crown ornament on
the top of my head, I pray!Grant your blessings so that we may find freedom here and nowFrom
all the sufferings of saṃsāra and its lower realms!

Listen well, my dear disciples who are gathered here,For all those whose hearts have not been
spoiled, consider this:

The chances of finding a human existence are one in a hundred.Now that you have found one, if
you fail to practise the sublime Dharma,How could you possibly expect to find such an opportunity
again?This is why it is crucial that you take advantage of your situation.Conceiving
of your body as a servant or a thing to ferry you about,Do not allow it to rest in idleness
for even a single moment;Use it well, spurring on your entire body, speech and mind
to virtue.

You might spend your whole life pursuing only food and clothing,With great effort and without
regard for suffering or harmful deeds,But when you die you cannot take even a single thing
with you — consider this well.The clothing and alms needed to keep you alive are all you
need.You might dine on the finest meal of delicious meat and alcohol,But it all turns into
something impure the very next morning,And there is nothing more to it all than that.So
be content with life-sustaining provisions and simple clothes,And be a loser when it comes
to food, clothing and conversation.

If you do not reflect on death and impermanence,There will be no way to practise Dharma purely,Practice
will remain an aspiration, one that is constantly postponed,And you may feel regret
the day that death comes, but by then it will be too late!

There is no real happiness among any of the six classes of beings,But if we consider the sufferings
of the three lower realms,Then, when you feel upset just by hearing about them,How
will you possibly cope when you experience them directly?Even the happiness and pleasures
of the three upper realmsAre just like fine food that’s been laced with poison —Enjoyable
at first, but in the long run a cause of ruin.

What’s more, all these experiences of pleasure and painAre not brought about by anyone but you
yourself.They are produced by your very own actions, good and bad.Once you know this, it’s
crucial that you act accordingly,Without confusing what should be adopted and abandoned.


It is far better to eliminate your doubts and misconceptions,By relying on the instructions
of your own qualified teacher,Than to receive many different teachings and never take them
any further.

You might remain in a solitary place, physically isolated from the world,Yet fail to let go
of ordinary concerns, and, with attachment and aversion,Seek to bring defeat upon your enemies
while furthering the interests of your friends,And involve yourself in all kinds of projects
and financial dealings.There could hardly be anything worse than that.

If you lack the wealth of contentment in your mind,You’ll think you need all kinds of useless
things,And end up even worse than just an ordinary person,Because you won’t manage even
a single session of practice.So set your mind on freedom from the need for anything at all.Wealth,
success and status are all simply ways of attracting enemies and demons.Pleasure-seeking
practitioners who fail to turn their minds from this life’s concernsSever their connection
to the authentic Dharma.

Take care to avoid becoming stubbornly impervious to the teachings.Limit yourself to just a
few activities and undertake them all with diligence.Not allowing your mind to become fidgety
and restless,Make yourself comfortable on the seat in your retreat cabin,This is the surest
way to gain the riches of a Dharma practitioner.

You might remain sealed in strict retreat for months or even years,But if you fail to make any
progress in the state of your mind,Later, when you tell everyone about all that you did
over such a long time,Aren’t you just bragging about all your hardships and destitution?All
their praise and acknowledgements will only make you proud.

To bear mistreatment from our enemies is the best form of austerity,But those who hate criticism
and are attached to compliments,Who take great pains to discover all the faults of others,While
failing to keep proper guard over their own mindstream,And who are always irritable
and short-tempered,Are certain to bring breakages of samaya upon all their associates,So
rely constantly on mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness.

No matter where you stay, be it a busy place or a solitary retreat,The only things that you
need to conquer are mind’s five poisons[2]And your own true enemies, the eight worldly concerns,[3]Nothing
else.Whether it is by avoiding them, transforming them, taking them as the
path, or looking into their very essence,Whichever method is best suited to your own capacity.


There is no better sign of accomplishment than a disciplined mind.This is true victory for the
real warrior who carries no weapons.When you practise the teachings of the sūtras and tantras,The
altruistic bodhicitta of aspiration and application is crucial,Because it lies
at the very root of the Mahāyāna.Just to have this is enough, but without it, all is lost.

These words of advice were spoken in the hidden grove of Padma,In the place called Kunzang Chöling,In
the upper hermitage in a forest clearing,By the old beggar Sangye Dorje.May it be
virtuous!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005. This translation was published in Chatral Rinpoche, Compassionate
Action, edited by Zach Larson, Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 2007.

Another name for Khenpo Ngawang Palzang .  ↩The five poisons are anger, desire, ignorance, pride
and envy.  ↩Hope for happiness and fear of suffering, hope for fame and fear of insignificance,
hope for praise and fear of blame, hope for gain and fear of loss.  ↩